should accept yourself just the way you are
what does that say about who I should become
is that just now off the table because I'm
already good enough in every way so am I
done or something get the hell up get your
act together adopt some responsibility put
your life together develop a vision unfold
all those manifold possibilities that lurk
within be a force for good in the world and
that'll be the adventure of your life [Music]
prices go up all the time because the government
is so involved that's why it keeps getting more
expensive and the quality goes down the quality
of Education I mean a high school degree you
know 50 years ago is is way more valuable than a
college degree today even a master's degree the
governments have destroyed the value of degrees
while dramatically increasing the price to to get
one so government drives quality down and price
up the free market does the reverse government
let's say the post office right post office was
a problem and so then FedEx came along right and
okay we can avoid the post office or more recently
uh governments create monopolies in taxi cabs
well Uber comes along Lyft comes along
and and creates some competition to these
government monopolies so the same thing is going
to happen with money government money is is so bad
and it's going to get worse that the market is
going to offer Alternatives yes the government
is going to try to put up roadblocks to protect
its Monopoly but ultimately it won't work
[Music]
hello everyone I am speaking today with Peter
Schiff The Economist and stock broker who
successfully predicted the 2008 housing
crisis today we will discuss the current
market hyperinflation fiat currency and
the value of gold in times of instability
looking forward to the conversation so thank you
very much for talking to me today and to everyone
who's watching and listening thank you for your
time and attention that's much appreciated so
the first thing I guess I might ask is what do
you think it is that the typical person who's
watching or listening should know on the financial
front practically for their own protection and
and incremental wisdom that they don't know I mean
people are aren't taught even the basics of how to
think financially in our education system and so
maybe you could walk through what you regard as
the as the basics of fun of financial literacy on
the Practical front uh well there's a lot there
but I think the the most pertinent thing that
people need to understand before they make any
Investments really particularly now is inflation
and the impact that inflation is going to have
on the decisions that they make on their
savings and their investment because inflation
is probably a bigger threat now than it's ever
been and therefore it's a even bigger Factor
in determining everything that we do and
ultimately uh what the rewards are going
to be or the returns from your Investments
and and the reason I think that inflation
is a bigger problem now then it's it's been in
the past is because of the fiscal predicament
that most of the major governments
have you know put themselves in
and the fact that all politicians unfortunately
and this is a a fatal flaw in democracy
is that politicians first and foremost care about
themselves and their own political career and
their own re-election that's what they do for
a living they are career politicians and so you
know like anybody else you know they're
they're they're you know concerned about
perpetuating their career and most people who are
in politics they really enjoy it I mean they they
like all the perks that come with it uh you
know you get a lot of uh you know respect if
you're you know United States or Congressman
you're a senator uh you know it it's it's a
it's a career that a lot of people would aspire
to and once you get there you know once you get
to Washington and I'm sure this is true and you
know every you know country in Europe and all
around the world that you know you like it right
you like the lifestyle you like The Prestige that
comes with being a government official so you
want to stay there right well how do you stay
in office well you got to keep getting elected
you know in the United States you know we get
elections every two years right so politicians
are are very concerned about you know the polls
and they're constantly got their finger in the
air seeing where the winds are blowing and they
don't want to say anything or do anything that
might jeopardize their re-election and of course
one of the most important things that you need to
get reelected is you need a lot of money you need
to spend money on advertising on television which
is expensive and so you tend to cater to donors
um whether it's a corporation or a a you know
a union anyone that can provide a lot of money
uh you need to do things that are in their
interest and so what is usually sacrificed by
these politicians is the national interest doing
what's right for the country is secondary to doing
what's right for themselves and also in order to
be as successful as a politician you have to be a
really good liar and that's probably why a lot of
lawyers go into politics because lawyers you know
they're paid to lie I mean you have to argue your
client's case even if you know they're wrong right
and you have to put on a defense or whatever it
is and and so lawyers are generally pretty good
liars and so they they they they be they become
politicians because if you're honest and you tell
the truth you're not going to have a career
in politics you're you're just not gonna even
if you manage to get elected telling the truth
you're not going to stay in office telling the
truth so you got to lie so here's the situation
so you've had Decades of politicians buying their
re-election by promising voters something for
nothing because unfortunately that's what a
lot of Voters want they want something from the
government so if you're running for office like
I ran for office in in 2010 I was in Connecticut
uh but you know all I promised was more freedom
I'm going to leave you alone I'm going to repeal
government laws regulations I'm gonna I'm Gonna
Leave You free to do what you want and I'm not
going to interfere with you some people like that
message but a lot of people that's not what they
want they don't want to be free they want to be
taken care of they want to know what are you going
to give me what stuff am I going to get if I vote
for you right what free stuff and so yeah well
that's attractive in the short term especially
if you're not paying attention right and lots
people don't pay that much attention to political
discounts and so if you offer something tangible
and immediate that's grip short-term attention
and that can be an effective strategy yeah and if
you and so it's this proclivity to gift in this
manner that to the drives inflation do you want
to define inflation yeah I will decide I know
exactly what we're talking about yeah yeah I will
I'm getting there but and it's even worse when it
comes to trying to take away something like if you
want to cut a program spending that's even worse
because once a voter has something nobody wants to
take it away in fact even some of the politicians
let's say Republicans United States that might
have opposed certain government welfare type
programs you know when they started once they're
in place even those people won't vote to take
them away that's how how a danger it is so the
situation is you've had all these politicians who
have promised so much stuff that the taxpayers
can't deliver and of course when politicians
want to give voters something they don't want them
to pay for it so they want to spend money but they
don't want to raise taxes because governments
don't have any money they only have the money
they take they have to take money from the people
in order to give money back to the people and and
so if the government's taking your money that you
don't like so with paper money which unfortunately
we have now fiat currency where the governments
don't need gold real money they could just create
paper money out of thin air right they could
just manufacture it digitally and there it is
that enables governments to spend without
collecting taxes they run these large deficits and
they're able to print the difference and hand out
that money so they can give people money without
also taking the money away and now they don't
mind taking money away from rich people because
you know there's not as many of those right so
they don't lose as many votes although certain
rich people can donate a lot to their campaigns
which often you know prevents the taxes from from
getting too high but inflation I asked for the
definition inflation is really just another tax
because governments create inflation and inflation
is also probably one of the most misunderstood
words in the English language and deliberately so
I think governments around the world kind of led
the campaign to redefine inflation so if you go
back to the origin of the word and if you if you
have a dictionary even from the 1980s a Webster's
dictionary you'll get the real definition of
inflation so inflation is an expansion of the
money supply that's all it is deflation is a
contraction of the money supply so if you even
think about the word inflate inflate is to expand
like a balloon if you if you fill a balloon with
air it expands so with inflation what's being
expanded is the money supply and who expands
the money supply governments you know or they
they do it generally now through a central bank
but it's the central banks of these governments
that are expanding the money supply now when
you expand the money supply you have more money
well if you have more money but you don't have
more stuff to buy well the price of everything
goes up that's just basic economic supply and
demand the more money there is the less each
individual monetary unit is worth and now prices
go up now what governments have done is they've
said price is going up that's inflation no it's
not that is the consequence of inflation because
prices don't expand prices go up and down as a
result of inflation now what happens is sometimes
prices don't go up but you still have inflation
and that's because without that inflation prices
would have gone down and if prices don't go down
because government creates inflation that still
represents a loss to the people because they lost
the benefit of lower prices because in capitalism
the tendency of capitalism is to reduce prices
that's why it's so good because you keep coming
up with better ways of producing more efficient
ways economies of scale if you look at the CPI for
example in the United States in in 1800 and then
you look at the same CPI in 1900 and they have the
data prices were cut in half you had a hundred
year period where you had deflation or you know
the money or prices falling for 100 years uh and
that was a good thing you know all the politicians
now tell us that we need prices to go up that we
must have inflation you know the way they Define
it of two percent a year why why do prices have
to go up every year why can't they go down every
year isn't that better if stuff gets cheaper you
know if the cost of living goes down of course it
is but these politicians are trying to sell this
lie to the public that Rising prices are somehow
necessary for Prosperity that if prices don't go
up okay so let me sum up let me sum up what you've
said so the first thing you said that I think
is worthy of note for people to remember is that
the price of something is a function of the ratio
of the money available to the goods available
and so if you make money twice as
available then things cost twice
as much and that's and then you Defined
inflation you Defined inflation in that
regard you said inflation isn't prices going
up inflation is the value of money going down
and so it isn't because things are becoming more
expensive it's because there's more money chasing
the same amount or fewer items now you could
imagine an inflation in a particular sector that
would emerge because that thing has become more
scarce but General inflation is a reflection of
the inflation of the money supply right then you
said well here's here's the let me just finish the
summary you said there's drivers of that inflation
of the money supply and the basic driver is that
because we have a fiat currency that isn't paid
to something um permanent let's say like gold
and because politicians can create money
by printing it they're incentivized to do
so because they can offer people who aren't
paying much attention cheap gifts for nothing
and the fastest way to pay for that because they
don't want to raise taxes is to increase the money
supply and then you might say and this is where
we could bring this home to land is well what's
so bad about that is that we defer our expenses
into the future people get more free stuff from
the government there's a bit of a tax that's
the inflation tax let's say but all in all the
system works pretty well but you started this
whole discussion by saying the biggest threat
to the financial Integrity of people individuals
over the long run is inflation and so why does
that pose the Cardinal danger to long-term
Financial Security and prosperity for people
yeah well first of all it's not it's not working
well that that is the problem it it worked much
better when we had honest money when we were on
a gold standard uh if governments wanted to spend
money they needed gold and where did they get it
they had to collect taxes because they couldn't
create the gold it needed to be mined and and
so it was an honest system um and it it was
discipline on politicians now the politicians
don't want to be disciplined any more than you
know teenagers want to chaperone at the prom right
so you know they want to they want to do a lot of
stuff that The Chaperone won't allow and so gold
uh was keeping politicians in check but to your
point about individual prices you can't confuse
prices individually will go up and down based on
the supply and demand but if the price of one
thing goes up it's going to necessitate the
price of something else to go down uh and so the
general level of prices won't change uh it's only
when you have the expansion of the money supply
that the price of everything goes up because the
value of money is going down and so now you need
more money to to buy stuff but the problem now is
because these governments have run such enormous
deficits uh and it you know inflated you know
the housing bubble that popped in 2008 the US and
then uh a decade or more of massive deficit spent
ending quantitative easing programs and by the way
quantitative easing is inflation they basically
get you know taken inflation and put a nice
sounding name to it because quantitative easing
is printing money and buying government bonds that
that's inflation but if the politicians said our
policy is inflation you know the public doesn't
like that so they said no we're doing quantitative
easing and somehow that sounds you know more
palatable than inflation but they've created
so much and and for years and years these Central
Bankers were telling us that inflation is too low
we don't have enough inflation because it's not
two percent and again we don't need prices to go
up you know and the reason they say that price
prices have to go up is they claim that we won't
buy stuff that if we think prices are going to go
down we'll just hold off on buying indefinitely
waiting for a cheaper price and the economy
is going to collapse and that's a bunch of BS
because you buy things when you need them and when
you can afford them I mean if if that was true
nobody would own a cell phone nobody would own
a laptop computer nobody would have a television
that because all those things get cheaper every
year yet we keep buying them so it's nonsense
that we won't buy if price is going down in fact
price is going down create demand if you can't
afford something the way to have to buy it is for
the price to go down and then you can afford it
and then you buy it but they've created so much
inflation when they said it was too low that
now it's exploded right you've got double-digit
inflation or high single digit inflation pretty
much in all the invest economies in the world and
no government anywhere in the world is willing
to actually do what it takes to reduce inflation
because a they have to accept responsibility for
creating it and then B they have to significantly
reduce government spending and or raise taxes on
on middle class uh voters and neither of
those choices are politically expedient
and so politicians now are under more pressure
than ever to continue to finance their spending
through inflation so the inflation tax is going
to get bigger and bigger and bigger uh every year
and the reason that that's such a problem is
it's really the worst possible tax because
it impacts the people the most who can afford it
the least it's the middle class the Working Poor
uh and the retirees who are living off of fixed
income uh they end up paying the inflation tax
the most uh they have some savings they have a
pension they have an annuity a cash value and
insurance policies all this stuff gets uh
destroyed wealthier people who tend to own
assets and who have more good debt right bad debt
is Consumer Debt you go out and you borrow money
and you spend it you buy a consumer good you
buy a TV with your credit card and that's bad
debt or you take a vacation and you pay for
it on a credit card but if you buy an asset
particularly an income producing asset a piece
of property uh if you a business a comp stock
if you borrow money and you buy an asset and
that asset is appreciating and generating income
inflation is your friend inflation helps
you out because it wipes out the value of
your debt and you still have the asset so
wealthy people very wealthy people if they
invest the right way will benefit from inflation
whereas Ordinary People are going to get hurt
have you ever read the fine print that appears
when you start browsing in incognito mode it
says that your activity might still be visible to
your employer your school or your internet service
provider to actually stop people from monitoring
your online activity you need expressvpn think
about all the times you've used Wi-Fi at a coffee
shop hotel or even a friend's house without
expressvpn every site you visit can be logged by
the Admin of that Network that's still true even
when you're in incognito mode it expressvpn
is an app that encrypts all of your network
data and reroutes it through a network of secure
servers so that your private online activity stays
private expressvpn works on all your devices and
is super easy to use the app has one button you
tap it to connect and your browsing activity is
secure stop letting strangers invade your online
privacy by visiting expressvpn.com Jordan that's
expresvpn.com Jordan and get three extra months
free expressvpn.com Jordan [Music] so inflation
is particularly hard on non-entrepreneurial savers
so people who've put put away a certain store
of value maybe that's in a pension who aren't
invested in some active Enterprise that could
be generating Revenue it just devastates them
and if it's four percent a year they lose what
what does that mean they lose half the value
of their investment in like four percent
a year would be something like 10 years
yeah and so unfortunately it's going to be a
lot higher than than four percent yeah let's
talk about that for a second so two things
two questions about that that are that come
along with what you've already laid out the first
question is how is the inflation rate calculated
that's mysterious right because yeah that's it
Consumer Price Index that's another big part of
the fraud because certainly in America and I know
a lot more about the U.S CPI let's say than I do
about cpis in other countries but my assumption is
that you know the politicians are being dishonest
everywhere because you know the inflation rate
it's like a report card and if our kids were
responsible for grading their own report cards it
wouldn't be as shocker if they came home with all
A's right so that this is the problem that we've
hired the government to grade its own you know
is its own Pro success you know in the economy
because High inflation would would be would be bad
um so the government again when they're measuring
inflation and they're looking at prices they're
looking at an effect they're not looking at
the thing itself but over the years governments
have changed the methodology for measuring
price increases so the CPI that we use today
is nothing like the one that we use say in the
1970s yeah that's exactly what I want to focus on
because so the CPI for everyone listing that's the
Consumer Price Index and it's in principle please
correct me if I've got any of this wrong it's the
average cost of something like a standard basket
of goods that's what a question then is which
Goods yeah okay so let's go into that it used to
be there was the basket didn't change they picked
a basket and they just measured the same basket
year after year and so you could see the changes
now the basket changes the politicians decide what
to put in the basket and when to take out and
generally they take out stuff that's gone up
and they put in stuff that hasn't gone up as
much there's all this substitution there's a
lot of other indexes that they use where they
have hedonics or it is CPI there's hedonics
and so what hedonics is is the statisticians who
compute the CPI they look at a product and they
don't use the actual price they subjectively
decide if they think that product got better
and if they think it got better they adjust
the price down now maybe it did get better
and a lot of times stuff gets worse and
they don't they don't adjust for that
um like let's say they're looking at airline
prices and they just look at the ticket price
and they say wait a minute but you're charged
extra for luggage you're charged extra for a
blanket you're charged extra for food oh you
know they just look at the price you know a lot
of quality has gone down and a lot of things
that hasn't been captured and you know I did
this exercise I did this a long time ago in 2013
and I made a YouTube video about it but I just
did this for kicks I looked at the CPI in 2013.
and according to the CPI over the prior 10 years
um the the price of newspapers and magazines had
gone up about 30 percent according to the CPI in
2013 magazines and newspapers were 30 percent
more expensive than they were in 2003. well I
decided to check because it's easy to do you know
you could just go on the internet and you could
see a picture of those magazines because they put
the price right on the cover so I took about 20 I
took like 20 of the most circulated newspapers and
magazines in the country and I just looked at what
the price was in 2003 and then I took the exact
same magazines and I looked at the price on the
cover and I just compared it over the the 10 years
and what I found was that the actual increase
in price wasn't 30 it was a hundred and thirty
percent so the question is where did that extra
100 go because you know that those are the prices
so obviously the CPI is rigged in such a way as to
have a a number it's not that people lie when they
calculate like they get a certain number and they
say oh no that's too high the methodology that is
used has been engineered to mask the real degree
to which prices are rising you also pointed to
something else that's a fundamental flaw if your
reasoning is correct which is that if inflation is
best construed as ratio of money to Goods merely
calculating inflation as a consequence of price
increase doesn't capture the essential element
of the inflation because that's a huge problem
too because let's say prices should have gone
down by three percent and instead they go up by
two percent that's five percent inflation in that
my cost of living is five percent higher than it
would have been um had you not had the inflation
and again if you think about inflation as a tax
when the government taxes you legitimately let's
say through a sales tax or an income tax whatever
the government takes your money money that you had
goes to the government and then the government
takes that money and gives it to somebody else
right you lose your money but when they tax you
through inflation they don't take any of your
money you get to keep your money but they print
new money and they give that money to somebody
else now when that's somebody else spends that
money that he didn't earn it drives up your prices
so now you pay more so the government didn't
take your money they took your purchasing power
so it's the same thing and you know another
thing about our CPI that they how they changed
is Once Upon a Time back in the 70s housing
prices were in the CPI and and so were rents
and and that's about a third of the CPI which is
shelter but somewhere along the way they decided
to use something called owner's equivalent
rent instead of actual rent or actual home
prices now what is owner's equivalent
rent well it's a fiction that they made
up that nobody actually pays apparently
uh the government calls people at random
and asks them if they own their home how much do
they think they could rent it for if they were to
rent it and they keep track of those numbers now
I don't know like you know who they're asking I
mean I've owned homes for a long time I've never
gotten a call from a government guy wanting to
know what I think I could rent my house for but if
you're not a landlord and you're not in the rental
market how the hell do you know what you could
rent in your house for it's such a ridiculous way
to try to measure the cost of Shelter by using
a number okay so let me okay so let me ask you
a question about that because I've really been
curious about that because it's obvious the K the
case in Canada in particular like housing and rent
prices have skyrocketed in the last eight years
and that's not reflected in the inflation
statistics and that seems to be a major oversight
at least according to one line of argumentation
because that's one-third of what people spend
their money on now you could argue this is where
it gets complicated as far as I can tell that
if what you've bought is an asset that generates
income and its value goes up that's actually not
a cost to you it's an advantage you already
made reference well only if you if you own the
asset yes if you own it if you want to buy it and
the price has gone up it's a disadvantage right
because now the assets that you want to buy
are more more costly right so does that imply
that a proper CPI that would include the cost of
shelter would be calculated on the basis of those
who want to buy rather than those who already
own yeah because I'm trying to figure out how
to measure inflation properly here right you're
very complicated problem if you already own a home
then the cost of buying another one is not as
important to you of course a lot of people that
own homes they may want to buy bigger homes as
their families grow and and so it would be but
for those people what's important are uh your
maintenance costs your insurance costs your
property taxes uh there are a lot of other factors
that would be significant to you if you don't own
if you're a renter then obviously rent is of
primary importance to you you're you're paying
rent there's all sorts of valid ways that the
government could measure shelter as a component
of the cost of living but in the United States
they don't choose any of those valid ways they
choose another way and they're doing that because
they want the number to be lower they don't want
to report High inflation and they even do this as
part of the GNP because when they deport report
GDP they don't even do GNP anymore it's GDP
now that they report gross domestic product
in order to get the number they have to deflate it
every there's a deflator which adjusts the GDP for
prices and the government always underestimates
that deflator so the GDP looks bigger than it
really is because in many cases economies are
actually Contracting in real terms but because
the government is dishonest in the way it reports
it it reports economic growth even though there
is no real growth it's inflation which creates
the illusion of growth that's another reason
that politicians like inflation and of course when
inflation drives up the stock market and the real
estate market people think they're richer right
because oh my house has gone way up my stock but
it hasn't gone up your money has gone down right
but people don't necessarily connect those dots
uh you know they they think they're they think
they're wealthier but also if you think about
as I said earlier inflation benefits debtors
it's a transfer of wealth from creditors to
debtors who are the biggest debtors in the world
governments and the biggest most highly indebted
government is the United States government we
have 32 trillion dollars of funded debt almost
and our unfunded liabilities commitments that have
been made where they didn't borrow the money but
they're on the hook like guaranteed student loans
or a guaranteed pensions Social Security Medicare
all that stuff that's like a hundred trillion
so when the government creates inflation they
repudiate enormous amounts of their debt and so
the governments have massive incentives to create
inflation but then they have massive incentives to
lie about it and pretend it's not as bad as it is
and blame other people which is the main reason
that they redefine inflation from the expansion
of the money supply to Rising prices because
when you know inflation is an expansion of the
money supply then you know who causes it it's the
government you can't blame greedy corporations for
it you can't blame Putin for it Putin doesn't
print our money we do the Federal Reserve does
and so when politicians can redefine inflation
they can they can blame everybody but themselves
okay so so let me ask you a kind of a modified
Ponzi scheme question because this is something
that's bedeviled me so I understand that so I
have two questions I understand that getting
the measurements of something as fundamental
as inflation correct is absolutely necessary
so one of the things I've wondered is like why
aren't there independent teams of economists who
generate various true estimates of inflation make
them public so that the public itself could gather
a basket of independent estimates and know for
themselves what the inflation rate is very curious
about that well they have one other well I mean
there's a website who's reliable who's reliable
yeah you know well I think the least
reliable would be the government
right yeah yeah you don't want their statistics
because they're completely biased right you know
it's like you know the mafia is not going to give
you accurate statistics on crime right so um you
got to look to Independent sources but um I think
it's kind of obvious though if you understand what
inflation is and you see the enormity I mean the
United States is running two trillion dollar a
year plus deficits now uh and technically we're
not even in a recession the deficits are going to
get even bigger uh when this next recession starts
but how are we financing those deficits it's it's
inflation there's just no other way they'll look
at the the Federal Reserves balance sheet so we
know that inflation is going to be a significant
threat it's going to reduce the value of money and
so that has to be the single most important factor
in driving your decisions on savings on investing
um you know and and even for in this day and
age if you don't have a lot of money to invest
you know I I've been saying this for years to
people I started talking about it several years
ago people have to stock up on things you know
you know buy things that you're going to use in
a year or two buy it now because it's going to be
a lot more expensive if you wait why hold on to
the cash if the cash is going to lose value
uh just buy the things that you're actually
going to need because those things will retain
their value if you're planning on using them
so here's the Ponzi scheme question so because
of the efficiencies of the capitalist system
free market system let's say we are generally able
to produce more for less and in some instances we
seem to be doing that faster and faster so
consumer electronics are a good example and
price of computation and so forth and so what
that means is that independent of inflation
because of technological progress things will get
cheaper in the future the future will be richer
than the present so then you might say if you're
a politician you say well if that's the case and
if that's invariably the the case then why not
defer our debt to the Future like essentially
why not borrow from the future because the
future is going to be wealthier than the
present and then I wonder like if we had a three
percent increment in actual productivity per year
then maybe we could tolerate a two percent
inflation rate because fundamentally
the tendency for things to get cheaper because of
enhanced productivity would be balanced by that
inflationary proclivity so are the politicians
could you make a case that the politicians are
making a good bet because they're throwing the
debt into the future when we're going to be
richer no well they they are making a politically
opportunistic decision yeah fair enough because
they're they're telling the voters hey don't worry
about it your grandkids will pay for it right or
whatever uh and and right of course not all voters
have kids right some voters you know don't have
kids and so what do they care if somebody else's
grandchildren uh pay for their for their program
but the only time you could justify borrowing from
the future is if you are creating something that
future uh people will benefit from let's say
a capital investment let's say the government
is going to build a bridge and that bridge is
going to be there for 100 years right uh and
and people who aren't even born yet are going
to benefit from that bridge okay maybe they can
sell bonds to finance the construction of that
bridge that future people will end up paying
because they're going to have the benefit
of that bridge so you can make an argument
for debt to support that but if we're going to
borrow money just to pay for welfare benefits or
Social Security benefits where we're leaving our
children and grandchildren with nothing but a bill
right they don't have a bridge or a capital asset
uh the money's been spent I see so your argument
basically is is that if you're borrowing from
the future isn't designed specifically to drive
productivity let's say then it's a degenerating
bet yeah I don't think it's borrowing from the
future I think it's stealing from the future
you're trying yeah okay fair enough and and
yeah but you know a lot of this stuff is going to
backfire because I think the current generation
is going to pay for a lot of this stuff because
the dollar is going to collapse you know we could
have hyperinflation and and because the future
Generations are not going to pay this they're
you know they're they're they're going to leave
that you know they'll leave the countries that
because they're not going to want to be subjected
to the confiscatory tax rates when they can't get
commensurate benefits from government they're
going to leave uh the the currency is going
to collapse in value and we're already there I
mean we're already at that point because you're
talking about this intergenerational Ponzi
scheme that's really what Social Security is
I mean it wasn't created that way in the 1930s
when Roosevelt uh first uh concocted this social
security and it was totally unconstitutional and
unfortunate that that we haven't but the idea was
that it was like Insurance the government was
going to take the money and invest it and then
when everybody was older you would get paid
your benefits and they even called the taxes
premiums but the whole thing was a con because it
never was Insurance because the government never
invested the money they spent the money and now
they gave themselves an IOU they created these
things called trust funds and so what would happen
is the government would collect the money from
Social Security then they would take the Social
Security money and spend it on whatever military
or whatever they're doing but then they would
put an IOU in the government trust fund in the
form of a bond and then they would say oh we have
an asset in this trust fund we have a bond that's
not an asset it's it's your own debt it's like
if I write myself a check for a million dollars
I can't take that uncashed check and claim I've
got a million dollar asset no I mean it's also a
million dollar liability so there never was any
money in Social Security they spent it all their
the system is broke and now they have to keep
raising taxes on the workers but now they won't
even raise taxes on the workers so they just keep
they create inflation to pay for Social Security
we'll be right back first we wanted to give you
a sneak peek at Jordan's new
documentary logos and literacy
I was very much struck by how the translation
of the biblical writings jump started the
development of literacy across the entire
world illiteracy was the norm the pastor's
home was the first school and every morning
into a begin with singing the Christian faith
is a singing religion probably 80 percent
of scripture memorization today exists only
because of what is sung this is amazing here
we have a Gutenberg Bible printed on the Press
of Johan goodberg science and religion are
opposing forces in the world but historically
that has not been the case now the book is
available to everyone from Shakespeare to
modern education and medicine and science to to
civilization itself it is the most influential
book in all history and hopefully people
can walk away with at least a sense of that
okay so let me let me offer another Rosy scenario
sort of like the boring from the future scenario
so I've been thinking about this issue of fiat
currency and the fact that the currency is on
moored but we have a situation in the world
now where every currency is unmoored right
and so you might say no matter what form
of money you use you're making a bad bet
you're relying on something unreliable but if
you're going to rely on something unreliable
you should rely on the least unreliable currency
right and so then you might say well the least
unreliable currency becomes by default the
standard and the US has managed that for 50 years
60 years and so why isn't it the case because you
said for example well people who are subject to
unfair tax because of future deferral of debt
will leave but I could say yeah but there won't be
anywhere better to go I know there will be and so
the the whole world doesn't doesn't you know there
have those tax rates of a certain country you know
um Saddles it's yeah future generations with
too big a debt burden um those you know that
they could leave and go to a country that doesn't
have that demographic problem that big um of a
dead burden and and and and of course so you think
there'll still be enough call even if everyone's
on fiat currency and if all the currencies
are corrupt you still think there'll be enough
variability oh yeah corruption so that people
will vote with their feet like they are in the
U.S moving from correct Democrats correct Republic
and states and the idea that you know it's the you
have to settle for the least bad uh currency and
again currency isn't even really money money is
a commodity gold was money silver you know it
would be money uh legitimate currency which is
backed by real money is currency what we have now
is fiat currency and and both fiat currency and
and legitimate currency are substitutes for money
they're not actual money but they substitute and
they can function as money but they're not really
money in the real sense of how you define money as
the most marketable commodity which is would be
money but people have been saying well you know
the dollar is the cleanest shirt in the hamper
and but I I think the dollar only appears clean
because of its status as the reserve currency and
I think that status is in Jeopardy and when it's
lost then the dollar is going to be the the by far
the dirtiest shirt in in in in that hamper so so
and okay so two questions from that so first
of all maybe you could walk everybody through
why the government is the biggest debtor because
people aren't really clear even for example about
the difference between the deficit and the debt
and they don't know what the debt means to them
in real terms because it's always expressed in
these huge numbers like 132 trillion it's like
no one knows what that means but they could
figure that out if they knew how much of that
debt they were responsible for or their family
so you've got you've got two first of all why is
the government the big debtor well you've got the
national debt which is the accumulation of every
Year's budget deficit and then you've got the the
annual budget deficit which adds to the total debt
um but what I'm talking about creditors versus
debtors Nations can either be a creditor Nation
or a debtor Nation a creditor nation is a nation
in which the world owes it money more money that
it owes the world a debtor Nation owes the
world more than it's owed so prior to the
US going off the gold standard in 1971 and in
fact all the way up to probably the early 1980s
the United States was the world's biggest creditor
Nation right we we generated tremendous amounts
of wealth um under a Freer economy than the
one we have today and one that was governed
by the disciplines of a gold standard so we
became the world's wealthiest creditor Nation
today after 50 years of Fiat money America
is not only the world's biggest debtor Nation
America owes more money than all the
other debtor nations of the world combined
right that's how uh much our financial position
has eroded now when the dollar became the reserve
currency it became the reserve currency because
of America's Financial and Industrial might we
were the world's biggest creditor Nation we also
had huge trade surpluses now we have massive trade
deficits I mean over a trillion dollars a year
but when the dollar became the reserve currency
we made everything you know all the Consumer
Electronics that are now made in Japan or Korea
or China all that stuff was made in America I mean
if you wanted anything we made it in this country
in America and so since everybody wanted American
Products everybody needed American dollars to buy
them and the American dollar was as good as gold
because if you had dollars you had gold if you
had 35 dollars you could get an ounce of gold
from the government it was convertible and so
under those conditions the US dollar became the
reserve currency but today the the dollar would
never be the reserve currency today if it wasn't
already there right nobody would pick the dollar
given our financial position our trade-in
balances but you know it's been the reserve
currency because you know for the tradition of
the fact that it's been but in order for the world
to to maintain this status it's very expensive for
the world it's a huge benefit for America I said
we have a trillion dollar a year trade deficit
that means the world has to supply America with
a million dollars worth of merchandise for which
it doesn't get paid right it doesn't it doesn't
get products you know most countries in order to
export have to I mean in order to import have to
export you have to export something in order
to pay for your Imports well we don't have to
export anything we just print money and Export
that well that costs nothing but the rest of the
world has to produce real stuff and and use
resources land labor and capital to produce
products so Americans get to live beyond their
means because of the dollar status but the rest
of the world collectively lives beneath its means
and of course it's not um uh consistent because
some countries uh have to live even further below
their means depending on how big a trade Surplus
they have with the United States that's how much
they're subsidizing the US economy so a lot of the
Emerging Markets uh bearing even uh bigger uh uh
uh burden of preserving the dollar status and and
so I think the world is starting to move away from
the dollar not only because of the economic cost
of maintaining it but now we have raised the
political risks if you look at what the Biden
Administration did with Russia the unprecedented
sanctions on Russia this has really highlighted
the tremendous risk that every Sovereign
Nation assumes by being beholden to the dollar
because it puts tremendous power in the hands of
the United States it's like putting a noose around
your neck and then throwing throwing it over a
tree to America who's holding the other end then
you're hoping that they don't pull I mean nobody
wants to really be in that position especially if
you're a country like China where you know we've
kind of made China our enemy but in reality China
provides America with the largest annual subsidy
they're our biggest uh uh uh trade deficit is with
China so they Supply us with more merchandise than
anybody else and they're our largest creditor now
some people say it's Japan uh but no it's actually
China because you have to take Hong Kong because
Hong Kong is part of China so if you take all the
treasuries that Hong Kong owns and the treasuries
that China owns that's more than Japan so they're
our biggest Banker they Supply us with credit they
Supply us with merchandise right that's all going
to end right China is going to wean itself of that
okay so well so let's let's go after that so you
said and let me see if I got the reasons right
you said well the American dollar could stand as
the um fundamental currency because it had come
off the gold standard but had still benefited from
that it was extraordinarily productive it ran huge
trade surpluses it was a dynamic expanding rich
country with a very stable currency so it could
run on that for a long time and and you said
however now if people looked at the American
economic situation the American dollar without
that historical context there's no way the US
dollar would be the reserve currency but then
we're back to the dirty shirt in hamper problem
and I know the Russians and the and the Chinese
and the Brazilians Etc are wrestling with that
they're trying to move people away to some degree
from the dollar as a reserve currency but like
nobody in the right mind is going to trust the
Chinese currency so where so where do people
go if it's not the American dollar that's going
to be the standard for all the reasons you laid
out well you know the Euro doesn't look better
really and certainly you have to be insane to
use Chinese currency I think see that that is
the false choice that everybody thinks we have
to make one of the reasons that people are
so arrogant particularly in America that the
dollar status is not in jeopardy and so that we
can keep on running these huge deficits we can
create keep on creating inflation and the world's
got no choice right but the state with a dollar
because are they going to go to the euro are they
going to go to the Yen you know the pound I mean
they're winning B I agree all of those currencies
also have problems and so do you really want to
switch from one flawed fiat currency to another
even if those other Fiat currencies may be less
flawed than the dollar right do you really
want to make that shift I don't think that
that's what's going to happen what everybody
is missing is that there is an alternative
to the dollar that doesn't involve another fiat
currency and that's gold that is real money
everybody forgets that for thousands of years gold
was money it was money because it worked now over
the course of time we had paper currencies that
would arise and fall I mean hundreds of years ago
they were paper currencies that are now worthless
and you don't even know their names you know they
come and go but gold has has stayed you know
gold works as money and so I think what these
central banks are going to do is as they get out
of dollars they will just increase their Holdings
of gold gold will be the monetary anchor gold will
be the reserve monetary asset just the way it was
before the dollar it wasn't the British pound I
mean the British pound was a dominant currency but
gold was what everybody owned the British back the
pound do you see any do you see any evidence that
some of these alternate currencies are starting
to back their currency claims with gold oh yeah
you can what's happening on the central banks are
now buying more gold than they've bought in in in
decades especially a lot of the uh you know the
Emerging Market countries not even maybe so much
the United States isn't buying any gold and maybe
you know some of the more mature uh countries but
a lot of other countries that had predominantly
held dollars and then to a lower degree Euros or
Yen or pounds these countries are increasingly
buying gold that's why gold is at a record high
it goes around two thousand dollars an ounce but
in terms of just about every other currency on
the planet gold has been hitting all-time record
highs uh and again that's not really gold going up
that's all these Fiat currencies going down but
what are the reasons that countries would want
gold as opposed to the dollar is the US government
doesn't have any control over it you know gold is
an asset that's not also somebody else's liability
and nobody could create it you have to mine it no
one country you know has the advantage so
you know why would you want to take away
uh that that privilege that the United States has
and just bestow it on somebody else who is going
to abuse it the same way I mean the United States
abused that privilege that we had and we we we
exported all this inflation to the world we took
advantage of the this the position that we were
in uh so why would you want to put another nation
in in a position to similarly take advantage of
the world it's much better to go back to to
honest money and again even when we were on
Bretton Woods before you know 1971 and we were on
the dollar standard it was because the dollar was
backed by gold again if you held dollars you held
gold that's where the saying came from the dollar
is as good as gold in fact the legal definition
of a dollar is a is a weight of gold that's what
a dollar is dollars are gold the the the paper
currency that circulated Federal Reserve notes
are not dollars they are notes of the Federal
Reserve initially the those Federal Reserve notes
were payable in dollars the dollars were the gold
that the Federal Reserve notes paid because if you
think about what a note is a note is a promise to
pay something a Federal Reserve Note is supposed
to pay something well what did it pay it paid gold
it paid dollars today Federal Reserve notes pay
nothing their ious nothing the Federal Reserve
is not obligated to give you anything I mean
if you have a ten dollar bill okay so people
people might object and they and they have
that well gold is just another arbitrary standard
of value it has some intrinsic worth it's useful
for jewelry it's useful for certain industrial
applications but it's just another psychologically
valuable currency without any intrinsic value
and so it shouldn't be a repository of value in
principle that's any more stable than let's say a
well-managed or even a badly managed fiat currency
and so what do you what do you why is it that
gold has proved itself let's say over centuries
or Millennia as a storehouse of value what is it
about gold intrinsically let's say that seems to
have given it that edge the idea that gold doesn't
have any intrinsic value is just pure nonsense
it's obviously politicians have a vested interest
in in trying to diminish gold as a monetary
alternative to the Fiat system and even now you
have a lot out of cryptocurrency enthusiasts
who say the same thing well you know gold has no
value because they want to justify something like
Bitcoin which also has no value and say well gold
worked as money and it has no value so so Bitcoin
could work well it's not true that gold has no
value gold is the most valuable the most useful
metal on the periodic table gold became money
because it was such a valuable commodity but gold
has a lot of properties that make it uniquely
qualified to be money more so than than other
Commodities that's why gold was so successful over
the centuries as money because people preferred to
use it as money it wasn't governments that decided
gold is going to be money the people decided that
gold was going to be money and once the people
decided that gold was going to be money if you
were a king you know well you would tax people in
Gold because if you wanted to pay your soldiers
to protect you your soldiers wanted gold right
so it was the money created in the free market
and it beat out all other forms of money because
gold you know a gold coin uh all they're all all
the same you could melt gold down and you can make
it into coins uh it's fungible it's portable it's
divisible but the other aspect of goal that is
the key you can save gold because if I have an
ounce of gold in 100 years in a thousand years
it's exactly the same it doesn't lose any of its
properties and in fact even if I take my gold and
I make you know I make a ring out of it or I I use
it to make a watch right you can melt this ring
down and you get your gold back and it's exactly
the way it was you could do something else with it
there's really no other metal you can keep using
it over and over and over again I mean they fill
teeth with gold if you find somebody buried in
the ground you know you could take their fillings
and you know the Gold's still there you know there
treasure ships from the 1400s 1500s they sink if
they recover the wreckage the only thing that's
still there is the goal it's an it looks exactly
the way it looked when the sink when the ship sank
500 years ago so from a point of savings because
money has to satisfy three primary conditions
two of them are a unit of account an immediate
exchange but the third one is the store of value
and that's important because it's also makes it
possible to do loans that I can borrow money you
can lend money and you can be repaid and you know
that the money that you're going to get repaid is
going to retain its value and so that's something
that gold that gold does better than than other
metals but the the value of gold even if I'm
not using my gold today as a metal let's say
I have gold stored in a safe and you say well you
know you're not using it for anything that's true
but I'm preserving the future use of that gold
somebody in the future is going to need that gold
and so I'm storing it right now because you know
there are more uses for gold that are discovered
all the time because of its very unique properties
I'm sure in a hundred years or a thousand years
there will be more uses for gold than there
are now and and so okay so let me where are
they push you on the crypto front for a second
so so you know I've been contemplating permanent
storage storehouses of value concerned about
such phenomenon that we've been discussing
as inflation and potentially hyperinflation Which
is far from rare even among developed countries I
think you have a one percent chance if you live in
a developed country of uh hyperinflation incident
at some point in your life it's something like
that but anyways the cryptocurrency people and
I think the Bitcoin people have made this case the
best is that they've managed to duplicate gold in
its important elements in that they've produced
a storehouse of value that can't be corrupted
because it's blockchained and distributed and
that's a nice argument that also gets more
scarce with time which was quite the brilliant
um technological innovation that requires work to
obtain and so that's the Bitcoin mining but
that is also easily distributable digitally and
so it's out of the hands of governments it's
an uncorruptable store of value it's widely
distributed and it's easily moved and so you know
that's not that that accounts for a fair number of
the properties that you described a money a moment
a monetary unit had to possess so what do you
think of crypto in general but more specifically
about Bitcoin because I think it's king of the
cryptos and do you think there's a case to be
made that gold has an advantage that crypto
cannot duplicate and then we might ask well what
if you had a gold-backed crypto because maybe then
you could have the best of both worlds so so what
are your thoughts about the I mean bitcoin's done
pretty well for a currency that doesn't exist you
know that's not government mandated Etc it's it's
stored its value there's a lot of well variability
oh first of all but Bitcoin isn't a store value
because you can't store something that you don't
have right first you have to have the value so as
I said Gold's value is its use as a metal right
that's what you're storing is the future use of
gold and metal whether you're going to use it in
jewelry or as a conductor in electronics or in
medicine whatever it is you're you're storing that
uh Bitcoin only has a price doesn't have value
price is something that you pay right value is
something that you get when you buy Bitcoin you
pay a price but you get no real value um and now
I agree the price of Bitcoin has gone way up from
when it was first started where you know you could
get multiple Bitcoins for a fraction of a penny
or a dollar whatever they started next to nothing
and at one point people were paying almost seventy
thousand dollars for for a Bitcoin um currently
it's around 27 000 as we're recording this
um so depending on when you bought you you
potentially made a lot of money if you sold
if you bought during the Mania hysteria of 2021
you know you you've lost a lot of your money if
you if you get out um but looking at Bitcoin look
Bitcoin did an excellent job of replicating the
qualities that gold has that made it better money
than you know cattle you know or salt or you know
other Commodities that have been money right gold
did has certain properties and Bitcoin you know
captured those properties but the most
important property at all of all is Gold's
metallic properties gold as a commodity Bitcoin
has none of that and and so Bitcoin just like a
fiat currency what what gives a fiat currency
its value just confidence people just believe
that it has value they believe that people will
accept it now part of that belief is driven by
governments which declare it legal tender and
which require it for payment of taxes and so
there is some real demand for dollars if you live
in America there's a demand for euros if you're in
Europe because you have to pay taxes and if you
don't pay taxes they could put you in jail and
so in order to avoid jail you need the currency
that the the government demands uh but Bitcoin
is similar to Fiat in that all of its value comes
from faith and confidence people just believe that
people in the future will want it and they'll pay
a higher price for it except there is no legal
currency status there is no government really
maybe other than El Salvador I don't know what's
going on over there but there's no government
that is accepting tax payments in Bitcoin
um so there's no natural demand
other than the speculative demand
from people who think they're going to get rich I
mean people who buy Bitcoin are buying it because
they expect the price to go up and the people who
buy it from them thinks their the price is going
to go up so it's just greater full theory that the
price is going to go up and that's what's driving
people to buy it uh it's very cumbersome if you
want to use it as a medium exchange or a unit of
account it's too volatile to be a unit of account
it's too expensive to be a medium of exchange and
it can't be a store of value uh so it's it's
it's not gold it's you know digital Fool's Gold
but you you hit the nail on the head when
you talked about a crypto that's actually
backed by gold that works that solves
all the problems that bitcoiners claim
gold has it well you know I can't send my
gold around the world I can't use my gold
to buy a cup of coffee well yes you can it's a
lot better than Bitcoin if I have gold stored
with any third party it could be a government it
could be a private company it could be anybody
you could tokenize that goal and
have a Bitcoin similar cryptocurrency
that is a digital representation of that actual
goal it's like a warehouse receipt an IOU for gold
and then if I wanted to give you some of my gold
I wouldn't have to ship you my bar I could just
send you my tokens you know over the internet
and and now the ownership goes from me to you
um you know it's it's an improvement on paper
money because again initially paper money came
as a substitute for gold I had my gold stored with
a blacksmith and instead of lugging my gold around
my blacksmith gave me an IOU and then I could
circulate that IOU because everybody knows the
gold is there and instead of having to get it they
just circulate uh the IOU in in the paper terms
well it's much more efficient to do it uh crypto
digitally and you can take an ounce of gold or a
gram of gold and divide it you know to tiny little
pieces so that I could buy a cup of coffee and pay
the Barista with my gold uh using the token uh
and it would be faster and cheaper than Bitcoin
and the difference is when I'm paying with gold
I'm paying with something real I'm getting one
commodity for another I'm getting coffee and
the guy that sold me coffee is getting gold
um and you can actually denominate the price
in Gold because gold is stable I mean it could
function much better as a monetary instrument
the only thing that you have you have to trust
you have to trust the third party but I mean
capitalism is all about trusting third parties
I mean private third parties we we buy an
insurance policy people buy life insurance
fire Insurance health insurance it's all a third
party that's selling you that policy the policy is
only as good as the third party's ability to to
pay you know how do you you know we have rating
agencies we have capitalism we have competition
for reputation there is no reason that you can't
have third parties to store your gold and then you
could use it you don't have to store all of your
gold that way you can keep a lot of your gold
yourself but the goal that you want to use as a
media of exchange uh you can use that uh digitally
and that works much better uh than Bitcoin you
have real value you have real well I've talked
I've talked to people who have attempted to
produce gold-backed cryptocurrencies and they've
run into from my understanding a variety of
legal impediments on that front do you know of
anybody who's doing that successfully and if so
why aren't they uh Prime competitors let's say
in the international market for Bitcoin I mean
the argument you laid out seems to make sense
and so you'd think well you'd think two things
you'd think given that governments are rushing
to digital currencies and that some governments
would like to displace the U.S dollar as
the reserve currency that the logical thing
to do for some enterprising country would be to
produce a digital currency that was gold backed
and so what's happening on that front
okay so there's two things first of all
the demand that is mainly coming in
cryptocurrencies including Bitcoin
is to get rich right people want to buy Bitcoin
because they think it's going to go to the Moon
and so that's really the demand for
cryptocurrencies it's not to have an
alternative as a medium of exchange and as a unit
of account most people that are buying Bitcoin
they still use dollars or Euros or Pounds in their
transactions they just hoard their Bitcoin because
they think they're going to get rich and and so
there's no real Demand yet for a cryptocurrency
that's backed by gold to be used as a medium
exchange people are still content to use their
Fiat currencies for that role um but I think
that once this crypto bubble really pops and
the losses you know stack up and and people
get burned and they're no longer interested
in these get rich quick schemes and they
really start to focus on an alternative
not to get rich but to preserve what they have
right because that's what gold is Right physical
gold is not about getting rich it's about
avoiding becoming poor it's about avoiding the
inflation tax and and so I think as the inflation
rates get worse throughout you know the world
there will be more of a demand for an alternative
medium of exchange to these Fiat currencies that
can also store value you said you said some of
that is happening already you said that many
countries around the world the central banks are
buying gold the central banks right seems to be a
right right so and and many of those central banks
are also starting to experiment with the idea of
an imposed digital currency well there there's
there's flirting on the market what they're
talking about is a digital fiat currency that
just gives them more yes I know they just want
they and if they want to eliminate cash it's just
inherently a very oppressive monetary system that
concentrates even more power in government
and diminishes uh individual liberty and
makes it easier for governments to become more
tyrannical so that's a whole different a topic
but staying on a gold back crypto so one reason
is that there's not a lot of demand for it yet
the other problem though is that to the extent
that there is some demand there is such a huge
regulatory impediment and I think it's deliberate
on the part of governments governments don't want
to have to compete with gold and and so the
barrier that a lot of companies face because
it's very easy to tokenize Gold this is not a hard
process it's the regulatory environment it's the
money laundering laws uh you know that are there
uh that make it very expensive to get into this
um business uh because you have to comply with all
these rules and regulations and also you have the
potential for governments to declare these tokens
Securities which they're not but some government
can say oh it's a it's a security and now it's got
to be registered and you've got to comply with all
these other rules and regulations so government
makes it very expensive to compete with their Fiat
currencies so what has to happen is the advantage
of a goal back crypto has to be so large that it
could absorb those costs and that's going to
happen because the inflation is going to be so
high but also you're going to have Sovereign
Nations potentially coming out with goldback
cryptos in the United States you may have state
governments coming out with their own official
uh gold back uh cryptos uh there it's I mean
all of this is going to happen the market is
going to find solutions to this problem you
know whenever the government you know has some
type of service that it provides and of course
all government services are going to be flawed
you know we talked about how capitalism lowers
prices governments raise prices whenever whenever
you look at an industry that that's heavily
regulated education right prices go up all
the time because the government is so involved
that's why it keeps getting more expensive and
the quality goes down the quality of Education
I mean a high school degree you know 50 years
ago is is way more valuable than a college degree
today even a master's degree so governments have
destroyed especially a master's degree yeah the
governments have destroyed the value of degrees
while dramatically increasing the price to to get
one so government drives quality down and price up
the free market does the reverse it drives quite
quality up and and and and and and price down
government let's say the post office right post
office was a problem and so then FedEx came along
right and okay we can avoid the post office or
more recently uh governments create monopolies
in taxi cabs well Uber comes along Lyft comes
along and and creates some competition to these
government monopolies so the same thing is going
to happen with money government money is is so bad
and it's going to get worse that the market is
going to offer Alternatives and yes the government
is going to try to put up roadblocks to protect
its Monopoly But ultimately it won't work and you
know the people will find ways around it okay
okay so well let's turn on the recommendation
front now so and we can talk a little bit
about your particular business as well so
I would say that one of the threads running
through our conversation is well first of all
you're cautioning people against the immense
danger not only of inflation but of potential
hyperinflation and you're making the case that
Fiat currencies including the American dollar
are intrinsically weak and getting weaker for a
variety of reasons and that's true systemically
not only in the US and that that's going to
inevitably increase inflationary pressure
now we've seen a fair bit of that in the last two
years let's say and it's certainly I think evident
to anyone who's thinking that the actual inflation
rate is much higher than the pronounced inflation
rate okay so now hypothetically people are going
to want to know how to protect themselves against
inflation if they're trying to store wealth in
the long run um trying to maintain their savings
at minimum let's say and you make a strong case
that gold is the proper medium in which to invest
savings that you wish to maintain now you broker
gold purchasing Services we can walk through that
a little bit and so someone could say well you
know you have an iron in the fire you have a
stake and the outcome here it's not surprising
that you're putting forward the pro gold Vision
but I presume the reason you're doing that is
because you actually believe it and are invested
that way yourself so what would you recommend to
people who are listening and these would be people
of a moderate income let's say or perhaps on the
Lower Side what would you recommend to them to be
doing in order to protect themselves against the
threat of inflation as the future rules forward
yeah well first of all absolutely right I don't
I don't promote gold because I have a bunch of
gold I'm looking to unload I mean I I went into
that business because I believe that people need
to own it I mean in fact I started shift gold uh
I had I was I owned a broker dealer and a lot of
my customers wanted gold because I promoted gold
I talked about it but I didn't I didn't sell it
at the time I was was just you know I was stock
broker and I was helping people with their stock
portfolios but I also recommended that they go
and buy some gold and they would go and buy it
from other companies but what was happening is
people were getting ripped off a lot of these
gold Merchants were uh overpricing their products
they were you know pushing them into numismatics
or these Collectibles and I didn't like what
was going on and so in order to make sure that
my customers didn't get ripped off I started my
own business to so that they could buy gold from
me and I could make sure that they they weren't
pushed into these other products and that they
bought bullion and they they paid a low price
for it so that's how I got into the business
um because I believed in it now I don't look
at gold though as an investment I look at gold
as money so to the extent that you want to keep
liquidity you don't want to make an investment
right you don't want to buy real estate you don't
want to buy stocks you don't want to buy bonds
you just want to keep some cash that's where I
see gold as a place in the portfolio right and
not the cash that you might need I mean at least
now I mean when we're starting to use gold back
crypto then you could keep everything in Gold but
for now you want to pay your rent your landlord
isn't taking gold yet I mean he probably will
in the future but right now he wants you know
dollars or Euros so you got to keep some cash to
pay your bills but if you're talking about cash
that you're going to hold on to that you might use
in a few years maybe to make an investment maybe
you think real estate's going to go down maybe you
think stocks are going to go down and so you want
to you want to have some dry powder to buy that's
where you want to keep gold instead of currency
because currency could lose so much value that
you know stocks can go down in value but still
go up in price you know so let's say uh stocks
could go down 10 or 20 percent in terms of gold
but they can go up in terms of dollars or or or
Euros so it's better to hold your dry powder in in
honest money and especially now because if you
look around the world interest rates in almost
every country are still below the official
inflation rates which means rates are negative
and of course the the real inflation rates are
much higher than the official rates so you're
losing a lot in cash maybe 10 20 years ago that
wasn't the case you could get an interest rate
that exceeded the rate of inflation and so you
were paid for the loss of uh purchasing power
and people would say hey you don't want to own
gold because you're giving up that interest well
now there is no interest there's negative
interest gold actually lets you avoid that
negative interest because negative interest is a
loss that's imposed On You by holding a currency
so you avoid that loss by owning gold so gold
uh is a substitute for money but you want to
make investments you don't want to just leave all
your money in gold gold is a metal it's not doing
anything it's not producing anything uh you're
gonna do better over time investing in productive
assets and that's what I do if you can identify
them yes and if you don't overpay for them I
mean that's a mistake that a lot of people make
they look at a company that has a good product
and they think oh it let me buy that stock
well the stock could be way overpriced so
it's not just buying a good company it's paying
the right price and because that's what's going
to determine your long-term return if you overpay
for an asset you're probably going to lose money
eventually now you can so how would you how do
you view how do you view let's say the relative
importance of something like a good so there
are these funds which I'll just outline this
for people who are listening that allow you
to purchase a basket of stocks essentially
and often those stocks are weighted to the index
is used to assess stock market performance and so
you can buy uh shares in a mutual fund in a fund
let's say that owns a basket of stocks a large
basket of stocks and so then you average your risk
across many companies and you benefit in principle
from the average increase in productivity across
that basket of Stellar companies and so those
those index portfolios have proved to be a pretty
good alternative to actively managed money and how
do you see investing in gold in relationship to
something like investing in an index fund well I
mean they're very different so first of all the
the idea of just indexing and just say look I'm
just going to buy the market I'm going to buy
all these stocks you know in certain periods
of time that could work out right because if a
lot of money is flowing into those indexes it's
going to push up the price of the stocks that
are included in those indexes but right now
because so many people have indexed the stocks
in those indexes by and large are overpriced
and if you you buy if you overpay for an asset as
I said you're going to lose eventually now you can
overpay for an asset and you can make money
if you can sell it to somebody who overpays
by an even greater amount and so you could trade
overpriced assets if you're Nimble and make money
but if you're a long-term investor the way to make
money is to buy something cheap buy it when it's
undervalued especially if it pays a good dividend
because now you can collect your dividends while
you're waiting for the asset that you bought
cheap to become expensive and I don't like passive
investing you know what I do for my clients
and what I do personally is I actively invest
um and over the long run that is much better
than indexing over certain periods of time
indexing can do better and then it becomes a
self-fulfilling prophecy because the money gets
sucked in chasing and performance how how do you
know that you're how do you know that your active
investing is allowing you to I accurately identify
stocks that are properly or under underpriced I
mean that's the million dollar question well there
are some basic you know truths to assessing value
of a business right you could look at a a business
because that's what a stock is when you're buying
a stock you're buying a piece of a business so
you look at the business and you can look at the
the revenues the profits the debt you know you
could look at all these metrics and you can tell
you know is it cheap am I buying the income
potential of this business am I getting a good
price you can look at ratios historically that
show you that something is cheap or expensive
now the problem that a lot of people have is
their time Horizons are so short because yes an
asset can stay cheap for a while before the price
goes up and usually when you get something cheap
it's because there's a problem something's got
to be going wrong that's causing people to sell
so what you have to be able to do is do your
homework and decide is this problem that is
hurting the price of this stock is it fixable is
it long term can we see beyond this problem to the
solution and is the market getting something
wrong and I'm getting a good price conversely
when stocks are expensive it's because they're
doing great and everybody loves them and then
what you have to decide is well are people being
too optimistic about this company that's doing
really well are there problems that the market
is not paying attention to that are likely to
come up in several years so there are ways to
do this and if you're smart and you st you have
basic principles over the long run I think you're
going to outperform just a static basket of stocks
where you're just going to pay whatever price the
market is demanding I mean people say well you're
saying that's partly because these index stocks
they also tend to be somewhat inflated in value
because so many people have dumped money into
them exactly that's artificially inflating the
price of the entire basket right right because
then that counter purposes to the idea of random
sampling it's no longer random if you're buying a
preferentially priced basket and then it's going
to work in Reverse when a lot of people want to
get out of the indexes all these stocks are going
to get sold because a lot of these stocks don't
even pay dividends I mean the problem is let's say
you're buying a bunch of stocks they don't pay
dividends if you retire and you have all these
stocks and now you need money to pay your bills
because you don't have a job you got to start
selling your stocks and that puts downward
pressure so by by placing those stocks in an
index they're no longer independent either right
you bundle them together and so the presumption
of Independence that was there to begin with
is violated by the bundling of the stocks in
the index but the other point I'm trying to make
is if I'm building a portfolio for my clients of
companies that I'm buying cheap and because I'm
buying them cheap I'm getting a high dividend I'm
getting a lot of income on my stock because see if
you're just buying a stock because you think the
price is going to go up that's just speculating
you could be wrong the price could go down I'm
buying stocks that even if the price never goes up
I still make a good return because I'm getting a
dividend right now regardless of what happens to
the stock price so if you build a big portfolio
of good dividend-paying stocks while you're still
working and you don't need the income you can take
those dividends and buy more stocks and build
up your portfolio but then when you retire you
don't have to sell your stocks you just take your
checks your dividends and you start spending those
you stop reinvesting and so that's not a Ponzi
mentality that's legitimate investing in the
market uh by buying companies that throw the most
important thing though that I think people can do
now is recognize though if I'm right about what's
going to happen to the dollar and the US economy
the companies I'm buying are international and
their customers are outside the United States
and these are the customers that are going to
benefit when the dollar declines and the U.S loses
that Reserve status and Americans can no longer
live above above their means that means a lot of
other people who are living beneath their means
they're going to get a reward from the dollars
a loss of status and those consumers in those
other countries are now going to be in better
shape I want to own businesses that have those
customers I want businesses whose customers are
going to get richer not whose customers are going
to get poor and I want customers who have a lot
of savings not a lot of debt so I own businesses
that are going to be able to thrive in an econ you
know where the US economy is in a lot of trouble
where it's in stagflation and I also own companies
that sell products and provide services that
people need and they're going to continue to
buy those goods and services even if they have to
cut back on other things to afford it you don't
want to have a portfolio where consumers
can easily do without what you're selling
or if you're not even selling anything a lot of
these tech companies you know all their income
is from advertising they give away the products
and they and they have advertisers but if the
consumers can't afford to buy products that
the advertisers are advertising then all that
ad Revenue goes away and a lot of these uh tech
companies that have these really high multiples
you know they're going to come crashing down okay
so if you were we're starting to come to near the
end of the time for our discussion if you were
giving people advice who are beginning to invest
let's say these are people who might say have a
hundred to five thousand dollars a month to invest
what would you recommend when do you think people
should start doing that when should at what level
of income should you start to consider putting
away some of your money how much should you put
away and then what concrete steps could you
take to start doing this it's broken down in
a very simple manner because lots of people have
no idea how to start doing this when it comes to
investing I mean the earlier you start the better
because you get the compounding effects of that uh
now if you allow inflation to destroy the value of
what you've invested then you know that's no good
but if somebody only has you know 500 a thousand
dollars a month to invest I mean what I would
recommend is that they use my mutual funds I mean
you could go to uh my my uh website europac.com
now I think the minimum is twenty five hundred
dollars to get your account going right so you
have to have at least that amount that's not a
lot but you can go on my website and just buy
my funds now my funds are also available at all
the discount brokers so if you have an account
at Schwab or Fidelity or Ameritrade or yeah all
these you know my funds are on their platforms
but um but then the I think the the incremental
investment you can invest a hundred dollars or
500 at a time you know you can you can have
small Investments once you've established uh
the portfolio but then you do get the benefit
of professional management and diversification
you get a a big portfolio of stocks that are
actively managed by by me and my team where
we are you know looking for good opportunities
buying stocks when they're cheap selling them
if they get too expensive um you know constantly
you know you know evaluating our Holdings making
sure that the stocks that we thought were cheap
um because they had a problem that those problems
are being solved and that we're right on our
research and if something comes up and we think
we've made a mistake we can sell a stock and and
redeploy the money or if we find an opportunity
that we like better than one that we have we
can you know we can make the changes that's
something that you can't do when you're just
in a in a in a static model you know and and
that's why my my funds the performance has been
so fantastic recently uh in the last you know
one three and five years relative our to our
peers is because we've done such a good job of
um stock picking and sector allocation I mean
not only are we way ahead of our benchmarks which
would be an index but we're way ahead of everybody
else who's trying to beat the indexes uh but I
think the the time period where my funds are going
to do the best and I have a value fund a dividend
payer fund an emerging market fund a gold fund and
an international bond fund it's going to be in the
future years when the dollar is really weakening
I mean the dollar hasn't weakened dramatically yet
I mean in terms of purchasing power it has I mean
that's clear I mean you need more dollars to buy
everything but in terms of Euros or Yen or pounds
that's not the case but that's coming I think
we're going to see a substantial decline in the
dollar relative these other currencies and that
is the environment where my funds are going to do
the best and as inflation rates pick up and we see
a bigger increases in commodity prices uh that's
going to really benefit my investment strategy
so okay so let's let's close with this perhaps so
the devil to some degree is always in time frame
you know and you've made a case for the inevitable
weakening of the American dollar as a reserve
currency and of its value as a fiat currency and
that's in keeping the latter part in particular in
keeping with its gradual dissent into comparative
lack of value against gold since 1971. but so
the devil is always timing and so over what
period of time do you think this unfolding
into a more inflationary period is going to occur
and and what makes you reasonably convinced let's
say of your timing well timing is is always
difficult I um I mean I know what's going
to happen I've known what's going to happen for a
long time right that that might be the problem but
where we are right now is exactly where I've been
forecasting we would be even going back to you
know my predictions of the 2008 financial crisis
you know I knew that crisis was coming because I
understood the mistakes that the Federal Reserve
made to create that housing bubble and I knew the
consequences for the financial set system when it
popped but even before the bubble popped I knew
the mistakes the government was going to make I
I predicted QE before I even knew the word I knew
they would do this and I knew they would inflate
an even bigger bubble uh that has finally popped
because I knew that eventually the FED would be
in a position at other central banks where the
they would have created so much inflation that
they would now be under pressure to do something
about the inflation problem but they couldn't
do that without creating a worse financial
crisis than the one that they used inflation to
mitigate in 2008 and that financial crisis has
already started we saw that with the failure of
Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank and a lot
more Banks would have already failed had they not
been bailed out the government Pat you know came
in and propped them up and printed more money and
and came to the rescue which is another mistake
but we're at a point now where inflation is going
to start to run out of control because the FED
has started to return to inflationary monetary
policies when inflation is already you know triple
it's two percent Target uh we're starting another
recession uh from the weakest you know financial
position that we've ever been in and all the stuff
that's been happening is stuff that I predicted in
fact even when covet first started and everybody
was saying oh this is very deflationary I said no
it's not it's massively inflationary because we're
people are not working they're not producing and
we're printing even more money than ever we're
we're we're actually paying people more to stay
home than they earned when they actually were
productive I said this is you know creating even
more inflation and so we're at this taking point
you know and in fact when the central banks had to
keep interest rates at zero for so long they did
that for a reason that was because they didn't
want the whole thing imploding so they kept it
on life support until they couldn't do it anymore
because of the the outbreaks of consumer prices
but I I think we've passed that point and and so
this is happening this is the time frame where the
air is coming out of this bubble it's still early
if you remember in 2007 when the subprime market
blew up and I was very you know active there we
had shorted a subprime market I mean you know they
they you know they made wrote a book they made a
movie about that trade well I lived that trade
we did that trade so I I was predicting you know
subprime I mean you can go one of my videos on
YouTube is mortgage Banker speech I gave in 2006
in front of 3 000 Mortgage Bankers I went there to
promote this hedge fund that was shorting subprime
but you could still watch my my talk with what
you don't have on the Internet is the smaller
talk that I gave later specifically on that fund
right this was the larger talk I had about maybe
50 people that came to the smaller presentation
about about the fun um but I knew at at that time
that the the bursting of that bubble but you
know we we would create this crisis but when
the subprime problem initially reared its head
everybody said don't worry about it the Federal
Reserve said it was contained Ben Bernanke said
don't worry about subprime it's contained well I
was on television at that time all the time I
used to be on cable news every week back then
I said no it's not contained this is the tip of
an iceberg this is a huge problem in the entire
mortgage Market we're headed for a financial
crisis you know it's anything but contained
well the government got that wrong then when
inflation really burst out as far as high prices
in 2021 what did they say oh don't worry about
it it's transitory right well I said no it's not
transitory it's permanent it's here to stay they
were wrong again well they're ignoring the warning
signs again just like they ignored uh the subprime
problem just like they ignored the outbreak of the
CPI they're ignoring all the early warning signs
of the of the financial crisis that we're in
now and the Great Recession that's beginning
that is much worse than the last one and so
that the significant thing is going to be the
difference because I think this time we're headed
for a currency crisis that's going to be the end
result of this next collapse is going to be the
end of the dollar status in a currency crisis and
so you have to have a very different Investment
Portfolio than the one you had in the prior decade
just hiding out in tech stocks isn't going to work
those stocks are going to go down you have to have
the international value the dividend paying the
commodity exposure old-fashioned type investing
gold and and that's what I'm doing and again
for for wealthier people you don't necessarily
have to buy my funds you can buy my funds but we
have separately managed accounts so if you contact
your Pacific Asset Management we manage portfolios
individual portfolios of stocks uh that I think
will perform extremely well during the economic
environment that we're in and that we're going to
continue to be in most people unfortunately are
going to get wiped out people are going to lose
lot in this environment but there's going to be
a small percentage of people there always are who
will make money during this time period And I I
just prefer to be among those people right just
like you know not everybody made money off the
subprime collapse there were a a number of people
who understood the problem and bet against the
conventional wisdom and and and they made money
and the conventional wisdom is generally wrong
and it's wrong right now they expect things to
happen and aren't going to happen they have a lot
of confidence and faith in central banks and the
fed and and they're wrong this is not going to end
the way they believe there is a huge mispricing
of Assets Now just like there was for mortgages
back then a lot of people don't understand
this and they're going to suffer but the
people who understand it are going to are going
to profit and and I'm hoping that as many people
as possible I can help them profit by by getting
them properly positioned with their portfolios
all right well that's an excellent place to stop
I would say we're pretty much right on time there
and so for everybody who's watching and listening
thank you very much for your time and attention
and Peter Schiff thank you very much for talking
to me today and walking me through a lot of this
somewhat Elementary material but it's very
good for people to hear exactly how these
things work right because we're not well taught
on the financial front and many of the terms
that are bandied about inflation debt deficit
investment for that matter gold standard Fiat
people don't understand these things and to
be to provide people with that information is
extremely helpful we will link to all of the
um opportunities that Peter described in the
description of the video so you can check that
out if you want and I'm going to switch over to
the Daily wire plus side now and talk to Peter
for another half an hour I do that with all my
guests to get a little bit more biographical
information to find out how we got where he
is and uh maybe to delve a bit more deeply into
his ability to have prognosticated accurately
regarding the 2008 financial crisis which was
quite the interesting catastrophe in which he
seemed to get right when very few people did so
for all of you who are watching and listening
um maybe you can direct your interest to the
Daily wire plus side and offer them some support
in doing so they make these podcasts for example
possible and at least at the Quality that they're
now being broadcast and Peter thank you very much
for agreeing to talk to me today and for sharing
what you know with everybody who's listening
and uh will well we'll talk again right away
and hopefully we'll have a chance to meet at some
point in the future Jordan has been my pleasure
to be here I really appreciate the opportunity to
speak with your audience and hopefully I can come
back and we can expand on these principles and
uh yeah if you're ever out here in Puerto Rico
or Connecticut I'm there once in a
while but happy to happy to meet you
yeah well hopefully that'll happen in the not too
distant future and once again oh and to everybody
here I'm in uh I'm in Monastery at the moment
heligan Croy is just outside of Vienna taping
this podcast and to the crew here thank you very
much for your help to the Daily wire plus people
for setting this up that's always much appreciated
and Peter thanks again everyone watching ciao you
thanks for participating and
we'll see you on the next podcast
hello everyone I would encourage
you to continue listening to my
conversation with my guest on dailywireplus.com